For decades, a 1946 US offer to acquire
Greenland from Denmark was a state
secret. The exact offer is unknown, but
US diplomats had previously floated a
price of 100 million dollars in gold.
But, it was a non-starter. Greenland was
not for sale.
Sound familiar?
We need Greenland for national security.
One way or the other, we're going to get
it.
President Trump plans to buy Greenland.
Is that how this ends? It wasn't. But
even if it had, how does one price an
island that you [music] think secures a
hemisphere? What is, for example, the
value of being able to stop a missile
before it hits New York City? While the
security rationale seems to be quite
strong, the economic case is not so
clear.
In the end, Trump relented, and many
pointed to a [music] 1951 agreement with
Denmark that already gives the US wide
military access to Greenland. But then
again, few ever believed the [music]
issue was really just about security.
It's clear that President Trump wants to
recreate a sphere of influence of uh the
United States over the Western
Hemisphere.
Greenland is very keen to do more
business and trade more with other
nations. At the moment, most trade goes
through [music] Denmark.
Back in 1946, at least one answer to how
much is Greenland worth was 100 million
bucks. Today, it's basically more money
than you could print. So, perhaps it's
worth reframing [music] the question.
In the 15th century, Greenland's
500-year-old Viking colony vanished.
Theories as to why make for fascinating
reading.
Then, slightly more recently, in a room
at the World Economic Forum, a similar
thing happened [music] to President
Trump's threat to buy or besiege the
island. What exactly happened in that
room? We also Donald Trump on the
podium. We want a piece of ice for world
protection. Goes into room with you and
he says he has a framework for a deal.
The details of that deal are still
emerging. But for now seem to exclude
his long desired acquisition.
Trump first floated the idea of buying
Greenland back in 2019. He revived the
idea again after winning his re-election
in 2024. He presented it as essentially
this big real estate deal that would
ease Denmark's [music] finances.
Some background on that.
Greenland is a semi-autonomous part of
the Kingdom [music] of Denmark. It sets
its own domestic policies but relies on
Copenhagen for about $600 million of
annual grants to fulfill them.
Greenland's economy is very small.
Fishing makes up almost all exports.
And its people are proud [music] of
that.
Reliance on the sea is deeply embedded
in Greenlandic life and culture. Though
the island is trying to diversify.
It's betting on tourism and mining but
progress is is just very slow.
That's because of a range of factors.
[music]
High costs, limited infrastructure,
harsh weather.
And especially the lack of skilled
workers.
In Trump's view, the American taxpayer
could assume some of those costs and
investments.
But why would they want to?
Greenland lives here in the Arctic
Circle and it's [music] considered
strategically valuable for several
reasons. First, the island is a critical
location from which to monitor missile
threats potentially coming from Russia.
Russia's posture in the region has
become much stronger. The country has
been conducting drills and also
signaling that in the future it might be
willing to pursue much more forceful
approach in the region.
The US has a military base in northern
Greenland called the Pituffik Space Base
where it has a radar system that
monitors space and can detect missile
launchers. But Trump had grander plans.
All we want from Denmark is this land on
which we're going to build the greatest
golden dome ever built. We're building a
golden dome. Golden Dome is President
[music] Trump's proposed missile and air
defense program. Which involves
deploying ground and space-based
technology that doesn't yet exist.
Within a system many experts warn may
not work.
But there's another reason emerging as
the world heats up. The more that
climate change leads to melting ice, the
more that region is going to open up for
maritime trade. And in this extreme
scenario, new routes would replace the
polar ice cap. But this is a relatively
small win as rising [music] sea levels
would put low-lying cities like
Rotterdam under water. Routes across the
Arctic [music] can be far shorter than
traditional passages like the Suez
Canal. With a trillion dollars worth of
goods passing through the Suez each
year, even a small shift or expansion to
the Arctic could be lucrative.
>> [music]
>> Now, you'll remember there was another
argument that Washington used to make
its case for owning the island. One
thing that has kind of surprised me is
how the rhetoric has shifted. If you
look at what President Trump was saying
in 2025, the main reason to have
Greenland was all about critical
minerals and rare earth. There is a
Danish geological survey
showing that Greenland might have around
35 deposits of so-called critical
minerals.
Things like lithium and platinum group
metals. According to the US Geological
Survey, Greenland contains about 1.5
million metric tons of rare earths. But
that's low compared [music] to places
like China, Vietnam, or Russia. And we
don't even have data for nations like
Madagascar or Thailand where rare earths
are being extracted at high levels.
Having minerals in the ground is also
not the same as bringing them to market.
And that's the problem with Greenland.
On paper, its strategic [music]
advantages are clear. Making use of them
is another matter.
So far the experience of 50 years of
drilling for commodities in Greenland
has indicated that there is nothing
commercial there to be exploited.
Greenland only has two small mines, one
for [music] gold and one for anthracite.
Most of the deposits that people are
looking at are far north, north of
latitude 50, which means that it's
almost winter permanently. It's very,
very difficult to exploit. You have to
build [music] everything, roads,
runways, ports, housing, power, supply
[music] chains, and in quite remote
Arctic locations.
So now Washington's argument has moved
on. There's certainly far more
attractive places to mine for rare
earths. Our interest is national
security.
Whatever the interest, those fundamental
obstacles, like big blank spaces on a
map where roads need to be, remain the
same.
They also constrain the island's
attempts to connect more directly with
the world.
Greenland opened a new international
airport in Nuuk, and the hope was to
expand links and direct connections to
to other countries. But in the first
year of being open has faced disruptions
because of the weather. I personally had
two flights canceled on a trip to Nuuk
last year because the plane simply
couldn't land.
Which makes control of Arctic waterways
essential for cargo ships and naval
vessels alike, no matter [music] their
origin.
Russia and China they're ramping up
their presence in the Arctic,
>> [music]
>> and Trump is very worried about that.
Which is why he says his golden dome
should be anchored in Greenland.
But putting aside whether it would work,
what would it cost?
We estimate, and this is a little bit of
a departure from what President Trump
[music] has said the price tag of the
program would be, that it could cost up
to $1 trillion [music]
based on us going through and looking at
each individual component, from
satellites to fighter aircraft to the
munitions that they use.
True, only part of [music] that cost
would be attributable to Greenland, but
the island makes anything logistically
ambitious financially chilling.
It's estimated that it already costs the
US between 50 and 200 million dollars a
year to run a single overseas base, and
that's before factoring in building one
somewhere like this.
So, a back-of-the-envelope cost-benefit
analysis of Greenland has already gone
multi-envelope.
But Trump's original plan also prompted
fears [music] of the death of NATO.
Maybe before we cost up a NATO-less
existence, it's worth understanding why
Greenlanders insist no amount of money
could buy their sovereignty in the first
place.
A key message is that they have the
right to define
>> [music]
>> their own future.
I think that's what sometimes what
people miss. We want to collaborate. We
want to set up partnerships and and
enhance the Greenlandic economy, but it
has to come through the Greenlanders.
We are 56,000 people living here. We'll
be so reliant on external factors and
collaborators.
People are, [music] of course, against
any American interference, but I think
to a certain extent that's wrong.
Americans [music] are welcome here as
long as they respect our norms and
value.
I really just hope [music] that tourism
will play a vital role in the
Greenlandic future and the economy
>> [music]
>> because
it's about preserving nature, it's about
preserving culture, and it's about
preserving what we all love and really
have to take care of.
We're basically living in one of the
[music] last untouched ecosystems on
Earth.
After Trump's rhetoric cooled in that
Davos meeting room, NATO allies
permitted themselves a conditional
unclench.
After all, Denmark, Greenland, and the
US all fall under NATO's security
umbrella.
The alliance is premised on the idea of
mutual [music] defense. An attack by the
United States against Denmark over
Greenland would end NATO as we know it.
So, [music] the stakes were just
extremely high. I think it is fair to
say that the European Union and the
United States are not going through the
best moment in their relationship. There
have been strong tensions and Trump's
statements and threats over Greenland
are just the latest episode. There are
growing concerns about the threat that
Russia poses to countries like the
Baltics, who President Putin very
[music] much sees as part of Russia's
traditional sphere of influence.
If he believes that NATO is no longer
the ironclad alliance that it once
[music] was, he may be emboldened to
take more actions against that eastern
flank. Models of a Europe-Russia war
involve vast loss of life and
extraordinary financial [music]
repercussions. We've estimated that it
could cost the global economy over a
trillion dollars, but in many ways the
cost of that conflict would go beyond
what we can quantify. [music]
In February, NATO responded with Arctic
Sunrise, a mission to expand its
regional presence, [music] and for now,
the alliance endures.
You can put numbers on parts of
Greenland, on bases and radars, and to
some extent minerals [music] and trade
routes,
but those estimates only tell part of
the story. Nature is directly related
and [music] embedded to our way of
lives.
So, we could never live without it. It's
what we have here that [music] is so
important to us, and we don't want that
to change.
Greenland's true value, perhaps isn't
what it would cost to buy, even if it
were for sale,
but what its inhabitants and the world
would pay if it were lost.
>> [music]
[music]